Physics

Chapter Five

MAGNETISM AND
MATTER

5.1 INTRODUCTION

136

Magnetic phenomena are universal in nature. Vast, distant galaxies, the
tiny invisible atoms, humans and beasts all are permeated through and
through with a host of magnetic fields from a variety of sources. The earth’s
magnetism predates human evolution. The word magnet is derived from
the name of an island in Greece called magnesia where magnetic ore
deposits were found, as early as 600 BC.
In the previous chapter we have learned that moving charges or electric
currents produce magnetic fields. This discovery, which was made in the
early part of the nineteenth century is credited to Oersted, Ampere, Biot
and Savart, among others.
In the present chapter, we take a look at magnetism as a subject in its
own right.
Some of the commonly known ideas regarding magnetism are:
(i) The earth behaves as a magnet with the magnetic field pointing
approximately from the geographic south to the north.
(ii) When a bar magnet is freely suspended, it points in the north-south
direction. The tip which points to the geographic north is called the
north pole and the tip which points to the geographic south is called
the south pole of the magnet.
Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter
(iii) There is a repulsive force when north poles ( or south poles ) of two
magnets are brought close together. Conversely, there is an attractive
force between the north pole of one magnet and the south pole of
the other.
(iv) We cannot isolate the north, or south pole of a magnet. If a bar magnet
is broken into two halves, we get two similar bar magnets with
somewhat weaker properties. Unlike electric charges, isolated magnetic
north and south poles known as magnetic monopoles do not exist.
(v) It is possible to make magnets out of iron and its alloys.
We begin with a description of a bar magnet and its behaviour in an
external magnetic field. We describe Gauss’s law of magnetism. We next
describe how materials can be classified on the basis of their magnetic
properties. We describe para-, dia-, and ferromagnetism.

5.2 THE BAR MAGNET
We begin our study by examining iron
filings sprinkled on a sheet of glass placed
over a short bar magnet. The arrangement
of iron filings is shown in Fig. 5.1.
The pattern of iron filings suggests
that the magnet has two poles similar to
the positive and negative charge of an
electric dipole. As mentioned in the
introductory section, one pole is
designated the North pole and the other,
the South pole. When suspended freely,
these poles point approximately towards
the geographic north and south poles,
respectively. A similar pattern of iron
filings is observed around a current
carrying solenoid.

5.2.1

The magnetic field lines

FIGURE 5.1 The arrangement
of iron filings surrounding a bar
magnet. The pattern mimics
magnetic field lines. The pattern
suggests that the bar magnet is
a magnetic dipole.

The pattern of iron filings permits us to plot
the magnetic field lines*. This is shown both
for the bar-magnet and the currentcarrying solenoid in Fig. 5.2. For
comparison refer to the Chapter 1, Figure 1.14(d). Electric field lines of an
electric dipole are also displayed in Fig. 5.2(c). The magnetic field lines are a
visual and intuitive realisation of the magnetic field. Their properties are:
(i) The magnetic field lines of a magnet (or a solenoid) form continuous
closed loops. This is unlike the electric dipole where these field lines
begin from a positive charge and end on the negative charge or escape
to infinity.
* In some textbooks the magnetic field lines are called magnetic lines of force.
This nomenclature is avoided since it can be confusing. Unlike electrostatics
the field lines in magnetism do not indicate the direction of the force on a
(moving) charge.
Reprint 2026-27

137

Physics

FIGURE 5.2 The field lines of (a) a bar magnet, (b) a current-carrying finite solenoid and
(c) electric dipole. At large distances, the field lines are very similar. The curves
labelled i and ii are closed Gaussian surfaces.

(ii) The tangent to the field line at a given
point represents the direction of the net
magnetic field B at that point.
(iii) The larger the number of field lines
crossing per unit area, the stronger is
the magnitude of the magnetic field B.
In Fig. 5.2(a), B is larger around
region ii than in region i .
(iv) The magnetic field lines do not
intersect, for if they did, the direction
of the magnetic field would not be
unique at the point of intersection.
One can plot the magnetic field lines
in a variety of ways. One way is to place a
small magnetic compass needle at various
positions and note its orientation. This
gives us an idea of the magnetic field
direction at various points in space.
FIGURE 5.3 Calculation of (a) The axial field of a
finite solenoid in order to demonstrate its
similarity to that of a bar magnet. (b) A magnetic
needle in a uniform magnetic field B. The
arrangement may be used to determine either B
or the magnetic moment m of the needle.

138

Reprint 2026-27

5.2.2
Bar magnet
equivalent solenoid

as

an

In the previous chapter, we have
explained how a current loop acts as a
magnetic dipole (Section 4.9). We
mentioned Ampere’s hypothesis that all
magnetic phenomena can be explained in
terms of circulating currents.

Magnetism and
Matter
The resemblance of magnetic field lines for a bar magnet and a solenoid
suggest that a bar magnet may be thought of as a large number of
circulating currents in analogy with a solenoid. Cutting a bar magnet in
half is like cutting a solenoid. We get two smaller solenoids with weaker
magnetic properties. The field lines remain continuous, emerging from
one face of the solenoid and entering into the other face. One can test this
analogy by moving a small compass needle in the neighbourhood of a
bar magnet and a current-carrying finite solenoid and noting that the
deflections of the needle are similar in both cases.
To make this analogy more firm we may calculate the axial field of a
finite solenoid depicted in Fig. 5.3 (a). We can demonstrate that at large
distances this axial field resembles that of a bar magnet.
The magnitude of the field at point P due to the solenoid is
B =

µ 0 2m
4π r 3

(5.1)

This is also the far axial magnetic field of a bar magnet which one may
obtain experimentally. Thus, a bar magnet and a solenoid produce similar
magnetic fields. The magnetic moment of a bar magnet is thus equal to
the magnetic moment of an equivalent solenoid that produces the same
magnetic field.

5.2.3 The dipole in a uniform magnetic field
Let’s place a small compass needle of known magnetic moment m allowing
it to oscillate in the magnetic field. This arrangement is shown in
Fig. 5.3(b).
The torque on the needle is [see Eq. (4.23)],
τ=m×B
(5.2)
In magnitude τ = mB sinθ
Here τ is restoring torque and θ is the angle between m and B.
An expression for magnetic potential energy can be obtained on lines
similar to electrostatic potential energy.
The magnetic potential energy Um is given by
U m = ∫ τ (θ )dθ

= ∫ mB sin θ dθ = −mB cos θ
= –m.B
(5.3)
We have emphasised in Chapter 2 that the zero of potential energy
can be fixed at one’s convenience. Taking the constant of integration to be
zero means fixing the zero of potential energy at θ = 90°, i.e., when the
needle is perpendicular to the field. Equation (5.3) shows that potential
energy is minimum (= –mB) at θ = 0° (most stable position) and maximum
(= +mB) at θ = 180° (most unstable position).

Reprint 2026-27

EXAMPLE 5.1

Example 5.1
(a) What happens if a bar magnet is cut into two pieces: (i) transverse
to its length, (ii) along its length?
(b) A magnetised needle in a uniform magnetic field experiences a
torque but no net force. An iron nail near a bar magnet, however,
experiences a force of attraction in addition to a torque. Why?

139

Physics

EXAMPLE 5.1

(c) Must every magnetic configuration have a north pole and a south
pole? What about the field due to a toroid?
(d) Two identical looking iron bars A and B are given, one of which
is definitely known to be magnetised. (We do not know which
one.) How would one ascertain whether or not both are
magnetised? If only one is magnetised, how does one ascertain
which one? [Use nothing else but the bars A and B.]
Solution
(a) In either case, one gets two magnets, each with a north and
south pole.
(b) No force if the field is uniform. The iron nail experiences a nonuniform field due to the bar magnet. There is induced magnetic
moment in the nail, therefore, it experiences both force and
torque. The net force is attractive because the induced south
pole (say) in the nail is closer to the north pole of magnet than
induced north pole.
(c) Not necessarily. True only if the source of the field has a net
non-zero magnetic moment. This is not so for a toroid or even for
a straight infinite conductor.
(d) Try to bring different ends of the bars closer. A repulsive force in
some situation establishes that both are magnetised. If it is
always attractive, then one of them is not magnetised. In a bar
magnet the intensity of the magnetic field is the strongest at the
two ends (poles) and weakest at the central region. This fact
may be used to determine whether A or B is the magnet. In this
case, to see which one of the two bars is a magnet, pick up one,
(say, A) and lower one of its ends; first on one of the ends of the
other (say, B), and then on the middle of B. If you notice that in
the middle of B, A experiences no force, then B is magnetised. If
you do not notice any change from the end to the middle of B,
then A is magnetised.

5.2.4 The electrostatic analog
Comparison of Eqs. (5.1), (5.2) and (5.3) with the corresponding equations
for electric dipole (Chapter 1), suggests that magnetic field at large
distances due to a bar magnet of magnetic moment m can be obtained
from the equation for electric field due to an electric dipole of dipole moment
p, by making the following replacements:
E →B , p → m ,

1
µ
→ 0
4 πε 0
4π

In particular, we can write down the equatorial field (BE) of a bar magnet
at a distance r, for r >> l, where l is the size of the magnet:

BE = −

µ0 m

(5.4)

4 πr 3

Likewise, the axial field (BA) of a bar magnet for r >> l is:

140

BA =

µ0 2m

(5.5)

4 π r3
Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter
Equation (5.5) is just Eq. (5.1) in the vector form. Table 5.1 summarises
the analogy between electric and magnetic dipoles.

TABLE 5.1 THE DIPOLE ANALOGY

Dipole moment
Equatorial Field for a short dipole
Axial Field for a short dipole
External Field: torque
External Field: Energy

Electrostatics

Magnetism

1/ε0
p
–p/4πε0r 3
2p/4πε0r 3
p×E
–p.E

µ0
m
– µ0 m / 4π r 3
µ0 2m / 4π r 3
m×B
–m.B

Example 5.2 Figure 5.4 shows a small magnetised needle P placed
at a point O. The arrow shows the direction of its magnetic moment.
The other arrows show different positions (and orientations of the
magnetic moment) of another identical magnetised needle Q.
(a) In which configuration the system is not in equilibrium?
(b) In which configuration is the system in (i) stable, and (ii) unstable
equilibrium?
(c) Which configuration corresponds to the lowest potential energy
among all the configurations shown?

FIGURE 5.4

Solution
Potential energy of the configuration arises due to the potential energy of
one dipole (say, Q) in the magnetic field due to other (P). Use the result
that the field due to P is given by the expression [Eqs. (5.4) and (5.5)]:
BP = −

µ0 m P
4π r 3

(on the normal bisector)

Reprint 2026-27

EXAMPLE 5.2

µ0 2 mP
(on the axis)
4π r 3
where mP is the magnetic moment of the dipole P.
Equilibrium is stable when mQ is parallel to BP, and unstable when it
is anti-parallel to BP.
BP =

141

EXAMPLE 5.2

Physics
For instance for the configuration Q 3 for which Q is along the
perpendicular bisector of the dipole P, the magnetic moment of Q is
parallel to the magnetic field at the position 3. Hence Q3 is stable.
Thus,
(a) PQ1 and PQ2
(b) (i) PQ3, PQ6 (stable); (ii) PQ5, PQ4 (unstable)
(c) PQ6

KARL FRIEDRICH GAUSS (1777 – 1855)

5.3 MAGNETISM AND GAUSS’S LAW
In Chapter 1, we studied Gauss’s law for electrostatics.
In Fig 5.2(c), we see that for a closed surface represented
by i , the number of lines leaving the surface is equal to
the number of lines entering it. This is consistent with the
fact that no net charge is enclosed by the surface. However,
in the same figure, for the closed surface ii , there is a net
outward flux, since it does include a net (positive) charge.
The situation is radically different for magnetic fields
which are continuous and form closed loops. Examine the
Gaussian surfaces represented by i or ii in Fig 5.2(a) or
Fig. 5.2(b). Both cases visually demonstrate that the
number of magnetic field lines leaving the surface is
balanced by the number of lines entering it. The net
magnetic flux is zero for both the surfaces. This is true
for any closed surface.

Karl Friedrich Gauss
(1777 – 1855) He was a
child prodigy and was gifted
in mathematics, physics,
engineering, astronomy
and even land surveying.
The properties of numbers
fascinated him, and in his
work he anticipated major
mathematical development
of later times. Along with
Wilhelm Welser, he built the
first electric telegraph in
1833. His mathematical
theory of curved surface
laid the foundation for the
later work of Riemann.

FIGURE 5.5

Consider a small vector area element DS of a closed surface S as in
Fig. 5.5. The magnetic flux through ÄS is defined as DfB = B.DS, where B
is the field at DS. We divide S into many small area elements and calculate
the individual flux through each. Then, the net flux fB is,

φB = ∑ ∆φB = ∑ B.∆S = 0
’ all ’

(5.6)

’ all ’

where ‘all’ stands for ‘all area elements DS¢. Compare this with the Gauss’s
law of electrostatics. The flux through a closed surface in that case is
given by

142

q

∑ E.∆S = ε

0

Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter
where q is the electric charge enclosed by the surface.
The difference between the Gauss’s law of magnetism and that for
electrostatics is a reflection of the fact that isolated magnetic poles (also
called monopoles) are not known to exist. There are no sources or sinks
of B; the simplest magnetic element is a dipole or a current loop. All
magnetic phenomena can be explained in terms of an arrangement of
dipoles and/or current loops.
Thus, Gauss’s law for magnetism is:
The net magnetic flux through any closed surface is zero.
Example 5.3 Many of the diagrams given in Fig. 5.6 show magnetic
field lines (thick lines in the figure) wrongly. Point out what is wrong
with them. Some of them may describe electrostatic field lines correctly.
Point out which ones.

EXAMPLE 5.3

FIGURE 5.6

Reprint 2026-27

143

EXAMPLE 5.3

144

Solution
(a) Wrong. Magnetic field lines can never emanate from a point, as
shown in figure. Over any closed surface, the net flux of B must
always be zero, i.e., pictorially as many field lines should seem to
enter the surface as the number of lines leaving it. The field lines
shown, in fact, represent electric field of a long positively charged
wire. The correct magnetic field lines are circling the straight
conductor, as described in Chapter 4.
(b) Wrong. Magnetic field lines (like electric field lines) can never cross
each other, because otherwise the direction of field at the point of
intersection is ambiguous. There is further error in the figure.
Magnetostatic field lines can never form closed loops around empty
space. A closed loop of static magnetic field line must enclose a
region across which a current is passing. By contrast, electrostatic
field lines can never form closed loops, neither in empty space,
nor when the loop encloses charges.
(c) Right. Magnetic lines are completely confined within a toroid.
Nothing wrong here in field lines forming closed loops, since each
loop encloses a region across which a current passes. Note, for
clarity of figure, only a few field lines within the toroid have been
shown. Actually, the entire region enclosed by the windings
contains magnetic field.
(d) Wrong. Field lines due to a solenoid at its ends and outside cannot
be so completely straight and confined; such a thing violates
Ampere’s law. The lines should curve out at both ends, and meet
eventually to form closed loops.
(e) Right. These are field lines outside and inside a bar magnet. Note
carefully the direction of field lines inside. Not all field lines emanate
out of a north pole (or converge into a south pole). Around both
the N-pole, and the S-pole, the net flux of the field is zero.
(f ) Wrong. These field lines cannot possibly represent a magnetic field.
Look at the upper region. All the field lines seem to emanate out of
the shaded plate. The net flux through a surface surrounding the
shaded plate is not zero. This is impossible for a magnetic field.
The given field lines, in fact, show the electrostatic field lines
around a positively charged upper plate and a negatively charged
lower plate. The difference between Fig. [5.6(e) and (f )] should be
carefully grasped.
(g) Wrong. Magnetic field lines between two pole pieces cannot be
precisely straight at the ends. Some fringing of lines is inevitable.
Otherwise, Ampere’s law is violated. This is also true for electric
field lines.

EXAMPLE 5.4

Physics

Example 5.4
(a) Magnetic field lines show the direction (at every point) along which
a small magnetised needle aligns (at the point). Do the magnetic
field lines also represent the lines of force on a moving charged
particle at every point?
(b) If magnetic monopoles existed, how would the Gauss’s law of
magnetism be modified?
(c) Does a bar magnet exert a torque on itself due to its own field?
Does one element of a current-carrying wire exert a force on another
element of the same wire?

Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter
(d) Magnetic field arises due to charges in motion. Can a system
have magnetic moments even though its net charge is zero?
Solution
(a) No. The magnetic force is always normal to B (remember magnetic
force = qv × B). It is misleading to call magnetic field lines as lines
of force.
(b) Gauss’s law of magnetism states that the flux of B through any
closed surface is always zero

∫s B .∆s = 0 .

If monopoles existed, the right hand side would be equal to the
monopole (magnetic charge) qm enclosed by S. [Analogous to
Gauss’s law of electrostatics,

∫ B.∆s = µ q
S

0 m

where qm is the

EXAMPLE 5.4

(monopole) magnetic charge enclosed by S .]
(c) No. There is no force or torque on an element due to the field
produced by that element itself. But there is a force (or torque)
on an element of the same wire. (For the special case of a straight
wire, this force is zero.)
(d) Yes. The average of the charge in the system may be zero. Yet,
the mean of the magnetic moments due to various current loops
may not be zero. We will come across such examples in connection
with paramagnetic material where atoms have net dipole moment
through their net charge is zero.

5.4 MAGNETISATION AND MAGNETIC INTENSITY
The earth abounds with a bewildering variety of elements and compounds.
In addition, we have been synthesising new alloys, compounds and even
elements. One would like to classify the magnetic properties of these
substances. In the present section, we define and explain certain terms
which will help us to carry out this exercise.
We have seen that a circulating electron in an atom has a magnetic
moment. In a bulk material, these moments add up vectorially and they
can give a net magnetic moment which is non-zero. We define
magnetisation M of a sample to be equal to its net magnetic moment per
unit volume:
M=

mnet
V

(5.7)

M is a vector with dimensions L–1 A and is measured in a units of A m–1.
Consider a long solenoid of n turns per unit length and carrying a
current I. The magnetic field in the interior of the solenoid was shown to
be given by
B0 = µ0 nI
(5.8)
If the interior of the solenoid is filled with a material with non-zero
magnetisation, the field inside the solenoid will be greater than B0. The
net B field in the interior of the solenoid may be expressed as
B = B0 + Bm

(5.9)

Reprint 2026-27

145

Physics
where Bm is the field contributed by the material core. It turns out that
this additional field Bm is proportional to the magnetisation M of the
material and is expressed as
(5.10)

Bm = m0M

where m0 is the same constant (permiability of vacuum) that appears in
Biot-Savart’s law.
It is convenient to introduce another vector field H, called the magnetic
intensity, which is defined by

H=

B

µ0

–M

(5.11)

where H has the same dimensions as M and is measured in units of A m–1.
Thus, the total magnetic field B is written as
B = m0 (H + M)

(5.12)

We repeat our defining procedure. We have partitioned the contribution
to the total magnetic field inside the sample into two parts: one, due to
external factors such as the current in the solenoid. This is represented
by H. The other is due to the specific nature of the magnetic material,
namely M. The latter quantity can be influenced by external factors. This
influence is mathematically expressed as

M = χH

(5.13)

where c , a dimensionless quantity, is appropriately called the magnetic
susceptibility. It is a measure of how a magnetic material responds to an
external field. c is small and positive for materials, which are called
paramagnetic. It is small and negative for materials, which are termed
diamagnetic. In the latter case M and H are opposite in direction. From
Eqs. (5.12) and (5.13) we obtain,

B = µ0 (1 + χ )H

(5.14)

= m0 mr H
= mH

(5.15)

where mr= 1 + c, is a dimensionless quantity called the relative magnetic
permeability of the substance. It is the analog of the dielectric constant in
electrostatics. The magnetic permeability of the substance is m and it has
the same dimensions and units as m0;

m = m0mr = m0 (1+c).

146

EXAMPLE 5.5

The three quantities c, mr and m are interrelated and only one of
them is independent. Given one, the other two may be easily determined.
Example 5.5 A solenoid has a core of a material with relative
permeability 400. The windings of the solenoid are insulated from the
core and carry a current of 2A. If the number of turns is 1000 per
metre, calculate (a) H, (b) M, (c) B and (d) the magnetising current Im.

Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter

EXAMPLE 5.5

Solution
(a) The field H is dependent of the material of the core, and is
H = nI = 1000 × 2.0 = 2 ×103 A/m.
(b) The magnetic field B is given by
B = µr µ0 H
= 400 × 4π ×10–7 (N/A2) × 2 × 103 (A/m)
= 1.0 T
(c) Magnetisation is given by
M = (B– µ0 H )/ µ0
= (µr µ0 H–µ0 H )/µ0 = (µr – 1)H = 399 × H
@ 8 × 105 A/m
(d) The magnetising current IM is the additional current that needs
to be passed through the windings of the solenoid in the absence
of the core which would give a B value as in the presence of the
core. Thus B = µr n (I + IM). Using I = 2A, B = 1 T, we get IM = 794 A.

5.5 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS
The discussion in the previous section helps us to classify materials as
diamagnetic, paramagnetic or ferromagnetic. In terms of the susceptibility
c, a material is diamagnetic if c is negative, para- if c is positive and small,
and ferro- if c is large and positive.
A glance at Table 5.2 gives one a better feeling for these materials.
Here ε is a small positive number introduced to quantify paramagnetic
materials. Next, we describe these materials in some detail.

TABLE 5.2
Diamagnetic

Paramagnetic

Ferromagnetic

–1 £ c < 0

0 < c< ε

c >> 1

0 £ µr < 1

1< µr < 1+ ε

µr >> 1

µ < µ0

µ > µ0

µ >> µ0

5.5.1 Diamagnetism
Diamagnetic substances are those which have tendency to move from
stronger to the weaker part of the external magnetic field. In other words,
unlike the way a magnet attracts metals like iron, it would repel a
diamagnetic substance.
Figure 5.7(a) shows a bar of diamagnetic material placed in an external
magnetic field. The field lines are repelled or expelled and the field inside
the material is reduced. In most cases, this reduction is slight, being one
part in 105. When placed in a non-uniform magnetic field, the bar will tend
to move from high to low field.

Reprint 2026-27

FIGURE 5.7
Behaviour of
magnetic field lines
near a
(a) diamagnetic,
(b) paramagnetic
substance.

147

Physics
The simplest explanation for diamagnetism is as follows. Electrons in
an atom orbiting around nucleus possess orbital angular momentum.
These orbiting electrons are equivalent to current-carrying loop and thus
possess orbital magnetic moment. Diamagnetic substances are the ones
in which resultant magnetic moment in an atom is zero. When magnetic
field is applied, those electrons having orbital magnetic moment in the
same direction slow down and those in the opposite direction speed up.
This happens due to induced current in accordance with Lenz’s law which
you will study in Chapter 6. Thus, the substance develops a net magnetic
moment in direction opposite to that of the applied field and hence repulsion.
Some diamagnetic materials are bismuth, copper, lead, silicon,
nitrogen (at STP), water and sodium chloride. Diamagnetism is present
in all the substances. However, the effect is so weak in most cases that it
gets shifted by other effects like paramagnetism, ferromagnetism, etc.
The most exotic diamagnetic materials are superconductors. These
are metals, cooled to very low temperatures which exhibits both perfect
conductivity and perfect diamagnetism. Here the field lines are completely
expelled! c = –1 and µr = 0. A superconductor repels a magnet and (by
Newton’s third law) is repelled by the magnet. The phenomenon of perfect
diamagnetism in superconductors is called the Meissner effect, after the
name of its discoverer. Superconducting magnets can be gainfully
exploited in variety of situations, for example, for running magnetically
levitated superfast trains.

5.5.2 Paramagnetism
Paramagnetic substances are those which get weakly magnetised when
placed in an external magnetic field. They have tendency to move from a
region of weak magnetic field to strong magnetic field, i.e., they get weakly
attracted to a magnet.
The individual atoms (or ions or molecules) of a paramagnetic material
possess a permanent magnetic dipole moment of their own. On account
of the ceaseless random thermal motion of the atoms, no net magnetisation
is seen. In the presence of an external field B0, which is strong enough,
and at low temperatures, the individual atomic dipole moment can be
made to align and point in the same direction as B0. Figure 5.7(b) shows
a bar of paramagnetic material placed in an external field. The field lines
gets concentrated inside the material, and the field inside is enhanced. In
most cases, this enhancement is slight, being one part in 105. When placed
in a non-uniform magnetic field, the bar will tend to move from weak field
to strong.
Some paramagnetic materials are aluminium, sodium, calcium,
oxygen (at STP) and copper chloride. For a paramagnetic material both c
and µr depend not only on the material, but also (in a simple fashion) on
the sample temperature. As the field is increased or the temperature is
lowered, the magnetisation increases until it reaches the saturation value
at which point all the dipoles are perfectly aligned with the field.

148

Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter
5.5.3

Ferromagnetism

Ferromagnetic substances are those which gets strongly magnetised when
placed in an external magnetic field. They have strong tendency to move
from a region of weak magnetic field to strong magnetic field, i.e., they get
strongly attracted to a magnet.
The individual atoms (or ions or molecules) in a ferromagnetic material
possess a dipole moment as in a paramagnetic material. However, they
interact with one another in such a way that they spontaneously align
themselves in a common direction over a macroscopic volume called
domain. The explanation of this cooperative effect requires quantum
mechanics and is beyond the scope of this textbook. Each domain has a
net magnetisation. Typical domain size is 1mm and the domain contains
about 1011 atoms. In the first instant, the magnetisation varies randomly
from domain to domain and there is no bulk magnetisation. This is shown
in Fig. 5.8(a). When we apply an external magnetic field B0, the domains
orient themselves in the direction of B0 and simultaneously the domain
oriented in the direction of B0 grow in size. This existence of domains and
their motion in B0 are not speculations. One may observe this under a
microscope after sprinkling a liquid suspension of powdered
ferromagnetic substance of samples. This motion of suspension can be
observed. Fig. 5.8(b) shows the situation when the domains have aligned
and amalgamated to form a single ‘giant’ domain.
Thus, in a ferromagnetic material the field lines are highly
concentrated. In non-uniform magnetic field, the sample tends to move
towards the region of high field. We may wonder as to what happens
when the external field is removed. In some ferromagnetic materials the
magnetisation persists. Such materials are called hard magnetic materials
or hard ferromagnets. Alnico, an alloy of iron, aluminium, nickel, cobalt
and copper, is one such material. The naturally occurring lodestone is
another. Such materials form permanent magnets to be used among other
things as a compass needle. On the other hand, there is a class of
ferromagnetic materials in which the magnetisation disappears on removal
of the external field. Soft iron is one such material. Appropriately enough,
such materials are called soft ferromagnetic materials. There are a number
of elements, which are ferromagnetic: iron, cobalt, nickel, gadolinium,
etc. The relative magnetic permeability is >1000!
The ferromagnetic property depends on temperature. At high enough
temperature, a ferromagnet becomes a paramagnet. The domain structure
disintegrates with temperature. This disappearance of magnetisation with
temperature is gradual.

FIGURE 5.8
(a) Randomly
oriented domains,
(b) Aligned domains.

SUMMARY
1.

The science of magnetism is old. It has been known since ancient times
that magnetic materials tend to point in the north-south direction; like

149

Reprint 2026-27

Physics
magnetic poles repel and unlike ones attract; and cutting a bar magnet
in two leads to two smaller magnets. Magnetic poles cannot be isolated.
2. When a bar magnet of dipole moment m is placed in a uniform magnetic
field B,
(a) the force on it is zero,
(b) the torque on it is m × B,
(c) its potential energy is –m.B, where we choose the zero of energy at
the orientation when m is perpendicular to B.
3. Consider a bar magnet of size l and magnetic moment m, at a distance
r from its mid-point, where r >>l, the magnetic field B due to this bar
is,

B=

µ0 m
2πr3

=–
4.

(along axis)

µ0 m

(along equator)

4 πr 3

Gauss’s law for magnetism states that the net magnetic flux through
any closed surface is zero

Bi S

B

0

all area
elements S

5.

Consider a material placed in an external magnetic field B0. The
magnetic intensity is defined as,
B
H= 0

µ0

6.

The magnetisation M of the material is its dipole moment per unit volume.
The magnetic field B in the material is,
B = m0 (H + M)
For a linear material M = c H. So that B = m H and c is called the
magnetic susceptibility of the material. The three quantities, c, the
relative magnetic permeability mr, and the magnetic permeability m are
related as follows:
m = m0 mr

mr = 1+ c
7.

8.

Magnetic materials are broadly classified as: diamagnetic, paramagnetic,
and ferromagnetic. For diamagnetic materials c is negative and small
and for paramagnetic materials it is positive and small. Ferromagnetic
materials have large c.
Substances, which at room temperature, retain their ferromagnetic
property for a long period of time are called permanent magnets.

150

Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter
Physical quantity

Symbol

Nature

Dimensions

Units

Remarks

Permeability of
free space

µ0

Scalar

[MLT–2 A–2]

T m A–1

µ0/4π = 10–7

Magnetic field,
Magnetic induction,
Magnetic flux density

B

Vector

[MT–2 A–1]

T (tesla)

104 G (gauss) = 1 T

Magnetic moment

m

Vector

[L–2 A]

A m2

Magnetic flux

fB

Scalar

[ML2T–2 A–1]

W (weber)

W = T m2

Magnetisation

M

Vector

[L–1 A]

A m–1

Magnetic intensity

H

Vector

[L–1 A]

A m–1

Magnetic moment
Volume
B = µ0 (H + M)

Magnetic
susceptibility

c

Scalar

-

-

M = cH

Relative magnetic
permeability

µr

Scalar

-

-

B = µ0 µr H

Magnetic permeability

µ

Scalar

[MLT–2 A–2]

T m A–1
N A–2

µ = µ0 µr
B =µH

Magnetic field
strength

POINTS TO PONDER
1.

A satisfactory understanding of magnetic phenomenon in terms of moving
charges/currents was arrived at after 1800 AD. But technological
exploitation of the directional properties of magnets predates this scientific
understanding by two thousand years. Thus, scientific understanding is
not a necessary condition for engineering applications. Ideally, science
and engineering go hand-in-hand, one leading and assisting the other in
tandem.

2.

Magnetic monopoles do not exist. If you slice a magnet in half, you get
two smaller magnets. On the other hand, isolated positive and negative
charges exist. There exists a smallest unit of charge, for example, the
electronic charge with value |e| = 1.6 ×10–19 C. All other charges are
integral multiples of this smallest unit charge. In other words, charge is
quantised. We do not know why magnetic monopoles do not exist or why
electric charge is quantised.

3.

A consequence of the fact that magnetic monopoles do not exist is that
the magnetic field lines are continuous and form closed loops. In contrast,
the electrostatic lines of force begin on a positive charge and terminate
on the negative charge (or fade out at infinity).

4.

A miniscule difference in the value of c, the magnetic susceptibility, yields
radically different behaviour: diamagnetic versus paramagnetic. For
diamagnetic materials c = –10–5 whereas c = +10–5 for paramagnetic
materials.

151

Reprint 2026-27

Physics
5.

There exists a perfect diamagnet, namely, a superconductor. This is a
metal at very low temperatures. In this case c = –1, µr = 0, µ = 0. The
external magnetic field is totally expelled. Interestingly, this material is
also a perfect conductor. However, there exists no classical theory which
ties these two properties together. A quantum-mechanical theory by
Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS theory) explains these effects. The
BCS theory was proposed in1957 and was eventually recognised by a Nobel
Prize in physics in 1970.

6.

Diamagnetism is universal. It is present in all materials. But it
is weak and hard to detect if the substance is para- or ferromagnetic.

7.

We have classified materials as diamagnetic, paramagnetic, and
ferromagnetic. However, there exist additional types of magnetic material
such as ferrimagnetic, anti-ferromagnetic, spin glass, etc. with properties
which are exotic and mysterious.

EXERCISES
5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

A short bar magnet placed with its axis at 30° with a uniform external
magnetic field of 0.25 T experiences a torque of magnitude equal to
4.5 × 10–2 J. What is the magnitude of magnetic moment of the magnet?
A short bar magnet of magnetic moment m = 0.32 J T –1 is placed in a
uniform magnetic field of 0.15 T. If the bar is free to rotate in the
plane of the field, which orientation would correspond to its (a) stable,
and (b) unstable equilibrium? What is the potential energy of the
magnet in each case?
A closely wound solenoid of 800 turns and area of cross section
2.5 × 10–4 m2 carries a current of 3.0 A. Explain the sense in which
the solenoid acts like a bar magnet. What is its associated magnetic
moment?
If the solenoid in Exercise 5.5 is free to turn about the vertical
direction and a uniform horizontal magnetic field of 0.25 T is applied,
what is the magnitude of torque on the solenoid when its axis makes
an angle of 30° with the direction of applied field?
A bar magnet of magnetic moment 1.5 J T –1 lies aligned with the
direction of a uniform magnetic field of 0.22 T.
(a) What is the amount of work required by an external torque to
turn the magnet so as to align its magnetic moment: (i) normal
to the field direction, (ii) opposite to the field direction?
(b) What is the torque on the magnet in cases (i) and (ii)?
A closely wound solenoid of 2000 turns and area of cross-section
1.6 × 10 –4 m2, carrying a current of 4.0 A, is suspended through its
centre allowing it to turn in a horizontal plane.

152

Reprint 2026-27

Magnetism and
Matter

5.7

(a) What is the magnetic moment associated with the solenoid?
(b) What is the force and torque on the solenoid if a uniform
horizontal magnetic field of 7.5 × 10–2 T is set up at an angle of
30° with the axis of the solenoid?
A short bar magnet has a magnetic moment of 0.48 J T –1. Give the
direction and magnitude of the magnetic field produced by the magnet
at a distance of 10 cm from the centre of the magnet on (a) the axis,
(b) the equatorial lines (normal bisector) of the magnet.

153

Reprint 2026-27

